Add Command guide (#214)
thelounge/thelounge.github.io: _guides/plugin-creation.md

---
layout: documentation
title: Create a custom plugin
description: Customize The Lounge using built-in plugin support, and share plugins with others
---

Plugins for The Lounge are npm packages hosted on [the npm registry](https://www.npmjs.com).

> The work similarly to themes. A theme is a plugin but not every plugin is a theme.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This works similarly to themes. A theme is a plugin but not every plugin is a theme.
```

> In a directory named after your new plugin (for example, `thelounge-plugin-foo`), start by creating a new package with the following command:

Reviewer: Maybe instead of this info, it might be better if we create a blank template for packages as a repository in the org? How does that sound to you? Then we can have a bit more info there around exactly what all this stuff is doing, but instead of all this explanation in this guide for setting up a dir, using yarn, etc, we can just say "clone [this repo]()" and go from there?

Author: Mmh, yeah, that would work too. I was just adapting the themes guide. Do we want to for the same for that too?

- Make sure `"name"` is the name of your package, `"thelounge-plugin-foo"`
- Change the value of `"main"` to be `"package.json"`
- Add a `"keywords"` to make sure your plugin is discoverable:
  ```json
  "keywords": [
    "thelounge",
    "thelounge-plugin"
  ]
  ```
- Add a `"thelounge"` section with required metadata. `"name"` is the display name that will appear in the client settings:
  ```json
  "thelounge": {
    "name": "Plugin Name",
    "type": "plugin"
  },
  ```
- Reference your main javascript file:
  ```json
  "main": "index.js",
  ```
- Add a dependency on `"thelounge"`
  ```json
  "dependencies": {
    "thelounge": "3.0.1"
  }
  ```
Although it is not required, we strongly recommend you also fill in the `"homepage"`, `"repository"`, and `"bugs"` sections.

You can then place all your plugin code in your `index.js`.

The Lounge defines an entry point for plugins, you can use it like this:
```js
module.exports = {
    onServerStart: api => {
        // do stuff with api
    },
};
```
Refer to [the API reference](/docs/api) to learn what you can do or start implementing your own custom command with 
[the custom command guide](/guides/command-creation).

> ## Helpful things for plugin developers

Reviewer: I'm thinking these can be sorted by making some helper functions in the api, and then just having them in the API docs. We won't want to explain everything here, you know?

Author: A helper for sending a message would be cool, I require could be helpful for other stuff tho I guess? For ppl who no experience with node like me, that might help.

Reviewer: Well, we don't want to make this seem "official" because then we have to support it, you know? The helper functions are about being able to abstract out the internal code, and if people decide to use internal stuff, and we change it, we don't have to worry about that because it's not supported. Putting it in a guide on our official docs makes it look official.

Here follows a helpful list of things that might be of use to plugin developers:

* You can import and use methods from The Lounge via node's `require` like this `const Msg = require("thelounge/src/models/msg");`
* You can send a message to a channel like this: 
  ```js
  chan.pushMessage(client.client, new Msg({
          type: Msg.Type.ERROR,
          text: "Hello World",
  }));
  ```
  where `chan` is the channel (`target.chan` if you are in a command) and `client` the public client.
  
## Installing a plugin locally

The Lounge currently doesn't allow you to install a plugin from source, thats why we have to do it manually.

> For that we have to add our plugin as a new package in the THELOUNGE_HOME/packages dir.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For that we have to add our plugin as a new package in the `THELOUNGE_HOME/packages` dir.
```

> For that you need to have a package.json in that packages dir that looks kinda like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For that you need to edit the package.json in that dir. If it doesn't exist, you can create it by installing 1 plugin/theme as per the docs It will look something like this:
```

Also, maybe link `docs` to the docs for installing plugins.

```json
{
    "private": true,
    "description": "Packages for The Lounge. All packages in node_modules directory will be automatically loaded.",
    "dependencies": {
        "thelounge-plugin-foo": "1.0.1"
     }
}
```

> the important thing is the name here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the version number doesn't matter at this point in time, just ensure that the name is unique. This should be the name of your package.
```

> You then need to create a folder with that name in the `node_modules` sub dir.

Reviewer: Worth just suggesting they copy the whole folder that we know they have already created above, if they have been following this guide?

Author: Mmhm, maybe. Ideally this would all be replace by a proper way to install themes locally anyways. If they copy the whole dir, it might become confusing on what to edit, that's why I only symlinked the two files that actually matter

We then need to place our index.js and package.json in that dir. 
You can do that manually by just copy pasting it, but that would involve copy pasting it for every change.

> I would recommend symlinking the files from the project into the packages folder, kinda like this:

Reviewer: Let's move away from `I`, and do something like "It is recommended" or something. We don't want these to be first person guides. Also, probably best to remove all of the bit above this with the "you could do X, but instead do Y" and just go straight to giving the command to symlink the whole directory that they have created.

So something like "in the directory that you have created your plugin, do `ln ...` etc

Author: Yeah, I just copy pasted that out of my readme, I'll rewrite it tomorrow.
